The FTSE 100 (^FTSE), European and US stocks started December on the back foot, selling off as markets continue to fret about an uncertain Federal Reserve interest rate path and sky high valuations for some AI-related stocks.

December is typically a strong month for stocks, but strategists say the so-called Santa Claus rally may not happen this year after a string of events — not least US president Donald Trump's tariff push — kept uncertainty high. That has led stocks to buck the usual seasonal trends throughout 2025, analysts say.

Over 85% of bets ride on a quarter-point reduction at the Federal Reserve policymakers' meeting next week. The Thanksgiving week rally was fuelled in large part by rising hopes for a cut and lower borrowing costs, on the back of supportive comments from Fed officials. But the central bank has now entered a blackout ahead of its gathering.

Meanwhile in the UK, chancellor Rachel Reeves and prime minister Keir Starmer continue to defend the details of last week's budget and their actions in the lead-up to it.

The moves lower match a broadly risk averse mood across major markets, with the Nikkei (^N225) in Japan losing ground overnight. Major cryptocurrencies bitcoin (BTC-USD) and ethereum (ETH-USD) also sold off.

Reeves and Starmer face accusations that they misled the public in the weeks preceding the budget by overstating the dire state of public finances.

It was clear that the UK's productivity performance was "weaker than previously thought", Reeves said in a speech last month.

Critics point to a letter from the Office for Budget Responsibility (OBR) at the end of October with calculations showing higher wages may offset the weakness in productivity. The letter also seems to show that Reeves was on track to meet her fiscal rules by 2029/30.

The prime minister hosted a press conference earlier on Monday where he repeatedly pointed out that going into the budget the government was grappling with a £16bn hole in public finances. He said he was proud of the measures laid out on 26 November, and that they would go some way to tackling child poverty, among other social issues.

The UK has sealed a deal to give the US zero tariffs on pharmaceutical products imported into the country, in return for the NHS spending more on medicines.

Import taxes on medicines and treatments will remain at 0% for three years, the UK Government said.

The Trump administration said the deal will lead to further investment by UK drugs firms in the US and create more jobs.

It comes after warnings that US pharma firms will shut down their sites in the UK if the NHS does not pay more for drugs.

Earlier this month, US ambassador Warren Stephens said further American businesses will axe future investments if “there are not changes made and fast”.

The row has been seen as a reason why US-based Merck (MRK) and AstraZeneca (AZN.L) cancelled or paused investments in the UK in recent months.

As part of the deal, the Government has agreed to increase the upper threshold for which it can buy new medicines by 25%.

It said this means that new medicines that might have previously been declined for not being cost-effective enough can be approved – such as breakthrough cancer treatments and therapies for rare diseases.

The FTSE 100 (^FTSE), US and European stocks started what promises to be a busy week in the green, as traders look to the UK government's long anticipated autumn budget on Wednesday and weigh the growing chances of a US Federal Reserve interest rate cut in December.

US stocks are looking to fully recover from a pullback that has cooled this year’s AI-driven market rally. Analysts suggest an end is near for a retreat that has driven notable losses in November.

Investors are heading into the shortened Thanksgiving trading week still debating the odds of a US interest-rate cut. On Monday, Christopher Waller joined another influential policymaker, John Williams, in setting the stage for Federal Reserve easing next month.

In the UK, budget-related headlines on Monday pointed to a crackdown on benefit fraud, as chancellor Rachel Reeves prepares to scrap the two-child limit in full.

Alongside this, a range of tax increases have been mooted, including a freeze on income tax thresholds for an extra two years to 2030, making salary sacrifice for pensions less generous and increasing taxes on the most expensive houses.

The chancellor has said her aim in the budget is to help people struggling with the cost of living and bring down inflation while attempting to plug a £20bn fiscal hole.

Meanwhile, assessments of Ukraine-Russia peace talks dragged defence stocks lower, bringing down European indices with them.

London's premier index gained 0.1% by the closing bell, with commodity stocks Endeavour Mining (EDV.L) and Fresnillo (FRES.L) among the top gainers in the index.

The DAX (^GDAXI) in Germany added 0.7% as the Ifo business climate survey came in slightly below expectations.

Over in France, the CAC 40 (^FCHI) rose 0.1%, having wavered between losses and gains all session.

The pan-European STOXX 600 (^STOXX) was up 0.4%.

The pound was flat against the dollar (GBPUSD=X), trading just above the $1.31 mark.

The S&P 500 (^GSPC) advanced roughly 1.3%, while the Dow Jones Industrial Average (^DJI) was 0.6% higher. The tech-heavy Nasdaq Composite (^IXIC) was up 2.3% as Wall Street stocks started to extend Friday's bounce.